# Tiny MIPS Assembler

## Overview

This project implements a **Tiny MIPS Assembler** in C++ for CSCE 5610. It reads human-readable MIPS assembly code (`.s` files), parses instructions and labels, and outputs 32-bit binary machine code suitable for simulation on the CELL MIPS simulator or similar tools.

This assembler supports sets of MIPS instructions (R-type, I-type, J-type), and uses two separate passes to parse and resolve symbols from a table. The output file will contain binary string representations of the intructions with one per line.

For the bonus segment of this project, there is a MIPS CPU simulator that loads the generated machine code, decodes it, and executes each instruction. The registers and memory are updates with each intstruction read. The results are displayed to show what occurs in the simulation.

---

## Authors

- Souban Ahmed  
- Bhargav Alimili  
- Bob Jack  
- Janaki Ramaiah Venigalla  

**Course:** CSCE 5610 – Computer Architecture  
**Group:** Group 2  
**Instructor:** Dr. Beilei Jiang

---

## Features

- Parses MIPS `.s` files line by line
- Ignores whitespace and comments 
- Resolves labels using a symbol table  
- Encodes supported instructions into correct 32-bit binary    
- Outputs binary to a `.txt` file   

## Bonus Section Features

- Implements a single-cycle MIPS CPU simulator in C++
- Loads and executes machine code generated by the assembler
- Simulates register operations, memory access, and program flow
- Supports all 10 bonus instructions: add, sub, and, or, slt, nor, lw, sw, beq, and j

---

## Instruction Sets

### R-type:
- `add`
- `sub`
- `and`
- `or`
- `slt`

### I-type:
- `lw`
- `sw`
- `beq`
- `addi`

### J-type:
- `j`

---

## Build Instructions

If you have **g++** and **make** installed. From the root project directory:

```bash
make
```

To manually compile main project use the following:
```
g++ -std=c++17 -Wall -Wextra -pedantic tiny_mips_asm.cpp parser.cpp encoder.cpp converters.cpp -o tiny_mips_asm
```

To manually compile the bonus portion use:
```
g++ -std=c++17 -Wall -Wextra -pedantic simulate_single_cpu.cpp tiny_mips_cpu.cpp -o simulate_single_cpu
```
---

## Program Operation Instructions

Once compiled, run the assembler using:

```
./tiny_mips_asm input.s output.txt
```
- `input.s`: MIPS assembly source file
- `output.txt`: Destination file for 32-bit binary output

## Bonus Program Operation Instructions

After the output file has been created. Load it into the single CPU simulator with:
```
./simulate_single_cpu output.txt
```
- `output.txt`: Text file containing binary representation of machine language to be simulated
